spec:abci2.0 - clarify crash recovery mechanism (#469)
cometbft/cometbft: spec/abci/abci++_app_requirements.md

differentiating concerns, like `/p2p`, `/store`, and `/app`. Currently,
CometBFT only uses `/p2p`, for filtering peers. For more advanced use, see the
implementation of
[Query in the Cosmos-SDK](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/e2037f7696fed4fdd4bc076f9e7053fe8178a881/baseapp/abci.go#L557-L565).

### Crash Recovery

CometBFT and the application are expected to crash together and there should not 
exist a scenario where the application has persisted state of a height greater than the
latest height persisted by CometBFT.

In practice, persisting the state of a height consists of three steps, the last of which 

> is the call to the application's `Commit` method, where the application is expected to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is the call to the application's `Commit` method, the only place where the application is expected to
```

persist/commit its state.

> On startup, CometBFT calls the `Info` method on the Info Connection to get the latest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On startup (upon recovery), CometBFT calls the `Info` method on the Info Connection to get the latest
```

committed state of the app. The app MUST return information consistent with the
last block for which it successfully completed `Commit`. 

The three steps performed before the state of a height is considered persisted are: 
- The block is stored by CometBFT in the blockstore

> - CometBFT has stored the state returned by the application through `FinalizeBlockResult`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- CometBFT has stored the state returned by the application through `FinalizeBlockResponse`
```

### Crash Recovery

CometBFT and the application are expected to crash together and there should not 
exist a scenario where the application has persisted state of a height greater than the
latest height persisted by CometBFT.

In practice, persisting the state of a height consists of three steps, the last of which 
is the call to the application's `Commit` method, where the application is expected to
persist/commit its state.
On startup, CometBFT calls the `Info` method on the Info Connection to get the latest
committed state of the app. The app MUST return information consistent with the
last block it successfully completed `Commit` for. 

The three steps performed before the state of a height is considered persisted are: 
- The block is stored by CometBFT in the blockstore

> - CometBFT has stored the state (results returned from the application)
> - The application has committed it's state within `Commit`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- CometBFT has stored the state returned by the application throuch `FinalizeBlockResult`
- The application has committed its state within `Commit`. 
```

  
The following diagram depicts the order in which these events happen, and the corresponding
ABCI functions that are called and executed by CometBFT and the application:

> ``` 
> APP:                                              Execute block                         Persist state
>                                                  /     return ResultFinalizeBlock            /
>                                                 /                                           /  
> Event: ------------- block_stored -------------/ -------------state_stored ----------------/---app_persisted_state
>                           |                   /                   |                       /     |
> CometBFT: Decides - Persistes block ---Call `FinalizeBlock`  Persist results------------Commit---- 
>             on        in the                                (txResults, validator
>           Block      block store                                updated,..)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``` 
APP:                                              Execute block                           Persist application
                                                / return ResultFinalizeBlock            / state
                                               /                                       /    |
Event: -------------- block_stored -----------/-------------state_stored -------------/---app_persisted_state
                          |                  /                   |                   /     
CometBFT: Decide ---- Persist ----------- Call ------------- Persist ------------ Call Commit---- 
          on Block    block in the        FinalizeBlock      results 
                      blockstore                             (txResults, validator updated,..)
```

Author: This is rendered weirdly :) I got the suggestion I think, but please confirm :)

```

As these three steps are not atomic, we observe different cases based on which steps have been executed

> before the crash occured

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
before the crash occurred
```

(we assume that at least `block_stored` has been executed, otherwise, there is no state persisted, 
and the operations for this height are repeated entirely):

- `block_stored`: we replay `FinalizeBlock` and the steps afterwards.
- `block_stored` and `state_stored`: As the app did not persist its state within `Commit`, we need to re-execute
  `FinalizeBlock` to retrieve the results and compare them to the state stored by CometBFT within `state_stored`. 
  The expected case is that the states will match, otherwise CometBFT panics.
- `block_stored`, `state_stored`, `app_persisted_state`: we move on to the next height. 

Based on the sequence of these events, CometBFT will panic if any of the steps in the sequence happen out of order,
that is if: 
- The application has persisted a block at a height higher than the blocked saved during `state_stored`.
- The `block_stored` step persisted a block at a height smaller than the `state_stored`

> - And the difference between the heights of the blocks persited by `state_stored` and `block_stored` is more 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- And the difference between the heights of the blocks persisted by `state_stored` and `block_stored` is more 
```

persist/commit its state.
On startup, CometBFT calls the `Info` method on the Info Connection to get the latest
committed state of the app. The app MUST return information consistent with the
last block it successfully completed `Commit` for. 

The three steps performed before the state of a height is considered persisted are: 
- The block is stored by CometBFT in the blockstore
- CometBFT has stored the state (results returned from the application)
- The application has committed it's state within `Commit`. 
  
The following diagram depicts the order in which these events happen, and the corresponding
ABCI functions that are called and executed by CometBFT and the application:

``` 
APP:                                              Execute block                         Persist state
                                                 /     return ResultFinalizeBlock            /
                                                /                                           /  
Event: ------------- block_stored -------------/ -------------state_stored ----------------/---app_persisted_state
                          |                   /                   |                       /     |

> CometBFT: Decides - Persistes block ---Call `FinalizeBlock`  Persist results------------Commit---- 

Reviewer 2: moved the suggestion and made a few others to a comment with larger scope.

On startup, CometBFT calls the `Info` method on the Info Connection to get the latest
committed state of the app. The app MUST return information consistent with the
last block it successfully completed `Commit` for. 

> The application is expected to persist it's state during the `Commit` method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The application is expected to persist its state during the `Commit` method.
```

CometBFT and the application are expected to crash together and there should not 
exist a scenario where the application has persisted state that CometBFT has not.

In other words, if `Commit` for a block H has not been executed and CometBFT crashed,
the application

> should not have persisted and relied on any state between the `Commit` for H - 1 and 

Reviewer 3: Didn't really understand the "and relied on" part.

> H. 

Reviewer 2: Not really part of this PR, but in line 824, below, it states that either Commit completed and last_block_height is now H or Commit failed and last_block_height is still H-1, but even if Commit crashed midway, it may have crashed after the advancing to H. So the restriction should be last_block_height and last_block_app_hash agree, not that they are agree on H-1.

Suggestion
```
If the app successfully committed block `H`, then `last_block_height = H` and `last_block_app_hash = <hash returned by Commit for block H>`. 
If the app failed during the Commit of block `H`, then either 
- `last_block_height = H-1` and `last_block_app_hash = <hash returned by Commit for block H-1, which is the hash in the header of block H>`; or, 
- `last_block_height = H` and `last_block_app_hash = <hash returned by Commit for block H>`.

Reviewer 3: I would, first, refer that `last_block_height` and `last_block_app_hash` are the fields returned by the `Info` method (https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/7c7b48039453aa66fd6b128af6701651e1398319/spec/abci/abci%2B%2B_methods.md). This because it was not clear to me, and these variables are only used here on the text.

Reviewer 3: Second, is it not possible to have one of the fields updated (to H) but the other not?

Reviewer 3: Third, I agree with Lasaro here that the app could crash during the `Commit` of height H and it will have the two fields updated to H state, although Comet will not be aware of this because the crash occurs before returning the control to Comet.

Author: Is the value assigned mid-commit before the crash persisted? As in, is the state not updated atomically (or at least saved)?

Reviewer 3: I hope #493 can help us.

Reviewer 2: > Is the value assigned mid-commit before the crash persisted? As in, is the state not updated atomically (or at least saved)?

It must be the case that both values are updated during commit, very likely as the the last steps, and the problem is ensuring that both updates are part of one atomic operation, probably along with putting the final nail on the old's state coffin. Since we don't control that, as it happens on the app side, we must require the app to implement this behavior.

Reviewer 3: The application typically uses something like leveldb. Correct me if I am wrong, but this kind of databases do not support transactions. So, while both writes are probably atomic, if a crash occurs between them the state can become inconsistent.

Reviewer: The main invariant is that the App state is always committed after consensus persists the results (returned by the app) of executing the block.
So the app and consensus "persist" actions don't need to be atomic. Upon recovery, there is some logic, poorly documented ATM in a section of the spec, to replay anything the app has "forgotten" (this is figured out with the handshake after recovery, using `Info` method).

On startup, CometBFT calls the `Info` method on the Info Connection to get the latest
committed state of the app. The app MUST return information consistent with the
last block it successfully completed `Commit` for. 

The application is expected to persist its state during the `Commit` method.
CometBFT and the application are expected to crash together and there should not 

> exist a scenario where the application has persisted state that CometBFT has not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
exist a scenario where the application has persisted state of a height greater than the latest one persisted by CometBFT.
```

In other words, if `Commit` for a block H has not been executed and CometBFT crashed,
the application

> should not have persisted any state between the `Commit` for H - 1 and 

Reviewer: It's actually H-N (I know it's surprising, but it's like that). The App does not need to persist every height

> 

Reviewer 3: Also commenting something that is not part of this PR, ehe.

> Note also CometBFT never calls Commit on an ABCI app twice for the same height.

Comet can call `Commit` for height H, then we have a crash, a recover, and since the application has returned to have state at height H, Comet will call `Commit` for height H "again". So, in fact, if `Commit` has returned for height H, then Comet will never call it again for height H.

Author: I guess a more accurate descrption here would be that `Commet` never completes the execution twice? As in, if it crashes before the return of `Commit` (and state persistance), it is technically possible to call it again?

Reviewer 3: Yes. But I didn't want to make this description (on the sentence) too long.

Reviewer 3: Actually, I am not sure anymore, after reading the comment block here: https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/main/consensus/state.go#L1672

Reviewer 2: Maybe the problem is referring to too things that are too general as synchronization points. I mean, for example, we shouldn't refer to "execute" commit or "return from" commit, but to the atomic operation of updating the height, hash, and the app state inside commit.

Author: That's a good point. because in my mind, a successful commit means the state is update as well as all other relevant fields. Maybe we should first specify what exactly is a successful execution of commit (on our side at least).

Reviewer 2: Yes, I think that would work.

> If `appBlockHeight == 0`, then call InitChain.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If `appBlockHeight == 0`, then call `InitChain`.
```

Note that, in case there is a failure to commit the first block and
a crash occurs,
upon restart, `InitChain` will be called again. As explained,

> the application should not see this as an issue,  

Reviewer 3: The render of this part is odd. The lines are "broken" like in the source code.

> as it is expected to crash together with Comet. 

Reviewer 3: To call it Comet reveals a certain intimacy with him. :P

But in the remaining of the document, CometBFT has been adopted.
